The government of Uttar Pradesh, established Avadh University, Ayodhya, initially as an affiliating university by it's notification No. 1192/fifteen-10-46(6)-1975 dated 04 March, 1975 and appointed Prof.(Dr.) Surendra Singh as the first Vice chancellor. In 1993-94, it was renamed as Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya in the memoriam of late Dr. Rammanohar Lohia, an epic socio-economic ideologue and freedom fighter par excellence.

The university initially started its office in a rental building at Civil Lines, Ayodhya. Land acquisition process for varsity's formal office started in 1976. Ultimately, the then Chancellor and the Governer of state Shri G.D. Tapase laid foundation of the present administrative building of the varsity on 02 May 1978.

The university assumed the shape of an affiliating cum residential varsity in April 1984. The residential segment became functional with the opening of four PG departments in the campus viz. History, Culture & Archaeology, Economics & Rural Development, Mathematics & Statistics and Physics & Electronics. Four more departemnts viz. M.B.A, Bio-Chemistry, Microbiology and Environmental Sciences were added to its academic paraphernalia in 1993-94 which in-turn brought recognition of the varsity under 12B scheme of U.G.C.

In 2000-01, Institute of Engineering & Technology was established on the campus with B.Tech. (in Mechanical Engineering, Information Technology, Computer Sciences and Electronics & Communication Engineering) and M.C.A. cources. In the same year, some other courses like M.C.J., M.S.W., B.Lib. and M.Lib. were also added to widen the academic spectrum of the residential setup. In addition, a number of PG programs like M.Sc-Biotechnology, M.T.A., M.P.Ed., M.Ed. and UG programs like B.B.A., B.C.A. and B.P.Ed. became functional on the campus from the session 2005-06. University started five new courses in campus from session 2017-18.

Presently, the university is catering education to about 5 lakhs regular/private student through its nine residential PG departments and on campus Institute of Engineering along-with more than 600 affiliated colleges spread over in the 7 districts of Ayodhya, Sultanpur, Ambedkarnagar,Lucknow, Barabanki, Baharaich and Gonda.




ABOUT LOHIYA JI

Ram Manohar Lohia (23 March 1910 – 12 October 1967) was an activist in the Indian independence movement and a socialist political leader. During the last phase of British rule in India, he worked with the Congress Radio which was broadcast secretly from various places in Bombay until 1942.

Ram Manohar Lohia was born on 23 March 1910 at Akbarpur, currently part of the state of Uttar Pradesh, India.[need quotation to verify] His mother died in 1912, when he was just two years old, and he was later brought up by his father Hiralal who never remarried. In 1918 he accompanied his father to Bombay where he completed his high school education. He attended the Banaras Hindu University to complete his intermediate course work after standing first in his school's matriculation examinations in 1927. He then joined the Vidyasagar College, under the University of Calcutta and in 1929, earned his B.A. degree.[3] He decided to attend Frederick William University (today's Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany) overall prestigious educational institutes in Britain to convey his dim view of British philosophy. He soon learnt German and received financial assistance based on his outstanding academic performance, studying national economy as his major subject as a doctoral student from 1929 to 1933.

Lohia was one of the founders of the Congress Socialist Party and editor of its mouthpiece Congress Socialist. In 1936, he was selected by Jawaharlal Nehru as the secretary of the Foreign Department of the All India Congress Committee (A.I.C.C), the highest body of the Congress Party. By the time he quit that responsibility in 1938, Lohia started to develop his own political standpoint by critically examining positions held by the Gandhian leadership of the Congress[5] and the Communists who had poured into the CSP.[6] In June 1940, he was arrested and sentenced to a jail term of two years for delivering anti-war speeches.[7] Already released by the end of 1941, Lohia became one of the leading figures of the Central Directorate which clandestinely tried to organise the Quit India revolt, sparked by Gandhi in August 1942. Captured in May 1944, he was incarcerated and tortured in Lahore Fort. As one of the last high security prisoners, Lohia, together with Jayaprakash Narayan, was finally released on 11 April 1946.

As a member of the Congress Socialist Party Lohia joined with that party when it left Congress. He remained a member of the Socialist Party when it fused in 1952 with the Kisan Majdoor Praja Party to form the Praja Socialist Party. Unhappy with the new party Lohia led a split from it to reform the Socialist Party (Lohia) in 1956. He lost to Nehru in 1962 general election in Phulpur. In 1963 Lohia became a member of the Lok Sabha after a by-election in Farrukhabad (Lok Sabha constituency) and in 1965 merged the Socialist Party (Lohia) into the ranks of the Samyukta Socialist Party. The two socialist factions merged, split and re-merged several times. He won Lok Sabha general election of 1967 from Kannauj (Lok Sabha constituency), but died a few months later.

CHANCELLOR

Hon’ble Chancellor & H.E. Governor of U.P. Smt. Anandiben Patel has been designated as the Governor of Uttar Pradesh by Hon'ble President of India, took the oath of Office on 29th July, 2019 at Lucknow.
Smt. Anandiben Patel
Hon'ble Governor, Uttar Pradesh
Life Introduction

Name	Smt. Anandiben Mafatbhai Patel
Date of Birth	November 21, 1941
Birth Place	Kharod, Bijapur Taluka, District Mahesana.
Permanent Address	''Dharam', near Shan Bungalows, Shilaj Ahmedabad.
Current Address	Raj Bhavan, Uttar Pradesh Lucknow
Education	MSc, M.Ed (Gold Medalist).
Occupation	Retired Principal (Mohinaba Girls High School, Ahmedabad) and Social Services
Literary Activities	Writing articles for 'Earth', 'Sadhana' and 'Sakhi' magazines from time to time.
Interests	Study, Writing, Travel, Public Relations.
Published Books	
• 'A mane hamesha yaad raheshe' (Gujarati Edition). 
• ‘Prayas’ 
• ‘Pratibimb’

Parliamentary Life	
Member of Rajya Sabha, 1994-1998.
In 1998, was elected from Mandal assembly constituency Ahmedabad, and became MLA. From 1998 to 2002, was the Minister of Education (primary, secondary, and adult) and Minister of Women & Child Welfare.
In 2002, became the legislator from Patan Vidhan Sabha constituency for the second time and proved the belief wrong that the Gujarat Education Minister can not win consequetive elections.Was the Minister of Education (primary, secondary, and adult) and Minister of, Higher and Technical Education, Women and Child Welfare, Sports, Youth and Cultural Activity from the year 2002 till 2007.
In the year 2007, became the legislator from Patan Vidhan Sabha constituency for the third time. From 2007 to 2012, she was the Minister of Revenue, Disaster Management, Road and Building, Capital Project, Women and Child Welfare.
In 2012, was elected for the fourth consecutive time MLA from the Ghatlodia assembly constituency in the Ahmedabad city and won the most votes in the state. She was the Minister of Revenue, Drought Relief, Land Reform, Rehabilitation, Reconstruction, Road and Building, Capital Project, Urban Development and Urban Housing from 2012 to 2014.
From 22nd May 2014 to 7th August, 2016, was the first woman Chief Minister of the Gujarat State.
Was the Governor of Chhattisgarh from 15 August 2018 till 28 July 2019.
Was the Governor of Madhya Pradesh from 23 January 2018 till 28 July 2019.
Political Activities	
Joined politics in 1987. Held important posts in the BJP like the President of State Women's Front, Vice President for BJP’s State Unit, Member of National Executive Council of BJP.
Was the only woman from Gujarat to participate in the Ekta Yatra from Kanyakumari to Srinagar conducted by BJP. Despite the threats of terrorists, was involved in the flag hoisting at Lal Chowk in Srinagar on 26 January 1992.
Achievements during Chief Minister's Tenure	
Launched the “Maa Vatsalya” scheme to provide free treatment to the poor and middle class families.
Launched the “Yuva Swavalamban” scheme to provide higher education for all poor students.
Campaign for 100% ODF (open defecation free) in Gujarat
Free toll tax (for non-commercial vehicles) in Gujarat
Started free Cancer tests and treatment for all women.
In order to enable Narmada water to reach the fields through canals and minor canals, successfully campaigned for unanimas land acquisition where there was unavailability of land for building of of canals.
More than 100 town plans were sanctioned in the shortest time.
Transparent implementation of Vidya Sahayak Yojana.
Vidya Lakshmi Bond and Vidya Deep schemes were implemented.
Mata Yashoda Award announced.
Use of Technology for process simplification
Construction of village roads at a cost of Rs. 10,000 crores.
Honors / Awards	
During the schooling, 'Veer Bala' award was awarded in the year 1958 at the Mehsana District School Sports Festival.
In 1988, was awarded the 'Best Teacher' award in Gujarat.
In the year 1990, was honored by the President of India with the'Best Teacher' award at the national level.
Was awarded Gujarat Government's 'Gallantry Award' for saving two girl students of Mohinaba Kanya Vidyalaya, who did not know how to swim, from being drowned in the Narmada River.
'Sardar Patel Award' by Patel Awakash Mandal, Mumbai in 1999.
'Vidya Gaurav' award by Shri Taptodhan Brahmin Vikas Mandal in the year 2000
In the year 2005, the 'Patidar Shiromani' award was given by the Patel community.
Was also honored by the Ambu Bhai Old School of Exercise, Rajpipla
Awarded the “Charumathi Yoddha” Award.
Foreign Travel	
Member of the Indian Government Team for the Fourth World Women's Conference in Beijing (China).
In the year 1996, travelled with the Indian Parliamentary Party to Bulgaria. Study tours of France, Germany, Holland, England, the Netherlands, America, Canada and Mexico etc wer undertaken.
In 2002, visited Namibia - South Africa with a team of Gujarat Branch of the Common Wealth Parliamentary Association for their 48th Conference.
In September 2009, represented Gujarat in the 'Village India' program in London.
In May 2015, traveled to China with Gujarat's Business Delegation as Chief Minister along with Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi.


THE VICE-CHANCELLOR



Prof. Pratibha Goyal
Vice-Chancellor
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India
Email Id.:
vc@rmlau.ac.in
Took Charge as the Vice-Chancellor, Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University on 22nd of November 2022

VICE-CHANCELLOR
Born in 1968, Dr Pratibha Goyal is an acclaimed personality in the area of higher education. She has a brilliant academic career to her credit. She did her graduation in psychology with Hons in English from Punjabi University, Patiala. She did MBA from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and Ph.D. from Punjabi University, Patiala. Her Ph.D. research was hailed as pioneer work in the area of management research.
She began her career as Deputy Manager in Punjab Spinning and Weaving Mills, a Government undertaking. Her immense love for mentoring young minds saw a shift in her career when she joined the faculty of Management in Punjabi University, Patiala and later in Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana where she has also served as Director, School of Business Studies from 2016 to 2020.
As Principal Investigator of three major research projects of the University Grants Commission, she has carried out research on child labour, BPO call centre workers and organized retail sector employees. She has participated and chaired sessions in several national and international seminars, conferences and symposia. Besides being on the editorial board of many journals, she has published more than 80 research papers in reputed journals and is the recipient of Best Paper Award. She has authored and edited 12 books. For her book 'Stress Management' she received apprecation from the Hon'ble Prime Minister of India Sh. Narendra Modi ji.
She has been a member of the Leadership for Academicians Program of MHRD held at TISS Mumbai and University of Pennsylvania, USA. She has visited several higher educational institutions for their accreditation.



VISSION & MISSION
 VISION
Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University envisions being an institute of excellence in scientific, humanities and technical education in the service of the nation for advancement of knowledge, socio-economic development and empowerment of youth. The well-established systems of governance and management along with the institutional leadership constitutes the inherent strength as demonstrated by high academic standards, quality research, strengthening of infrastructure facilities as well as consolidating professional networks to emerge as leader in the country. The university looks forward in disseminating information is specialized programmes and establishes research centre which are not only unique but solo across the nation. This empowers the stakeholders to revive and revisit the cultural heritage of the country. To be an internationally acclaimed university offering highest quality of education to students, to bring forth the nascent talents while nurturing the peaceful coexistence to serve humanity and be a responsible citizen on this planet.

 MISSION
The mission of Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University is as below:

To offer state-of-the-art undergraduate, post graduates and doctoral programmes.
To frame policies and create an atmosphere to attract and retain best faculty.
To create an atmosphere for imbibing noble ideas and cutting edge research through effective curriculum and infrastructure thereby producing the leaders and innovators for tomorrow.
To inculcate healthy moral values, democratic principles and ethical practices.
To emphasize collaborative consultancies and projects so as to have long term viable interaction with the industry and academia.
To empower the youth for nation building in accordance with our culture, heritage and environment.
 CORE VALUES
Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya is governed by Core Values in delivering its Mission and pursuing its Vision. The core values of the University are:

Excellence in all academic related activities through innovation, creativity and dedication.
Integration of a value system among students towards imbibing respect, tolerance, honesty, trustworthiness, strong character, transparency, accountability, integrity of thought and responsibility towards themselves and society.
Diversity and equity is ensured among all the stakeholders and to develop a diverse community.
Responsiveness as students is recognized as a first priority and providing support to them ensure their academic success.
Accountability in accepting responsibilities for achievement of common goals.
Recognition in all aspects of university enterprises including teaching, learning, research, scholarship, creative activity and public engagement.
Collaboration by commitments to collaborative and interdisciplinary study along with pursuing opportunities for sharing knowledge.
Sustainability by performing activities in environmentally, economically and socially sustainable manner.



CONTACT DETAILS FOR ADMISSION
For Admission in various Programme Students can contact to respective Departments
Course Name	Name	Email Id.	Contact Numbers
Admission Coordinator Residential Programme (2023-24)	Dr V K Srivastava	vksrivastava@rmlau.ac.in	9415382891
 			
BVoc (Fine Art VISUAL ART)-(SFS)	Dr. V.K. SRIVASTAVA	vksrivastava@rmlau.ac.in	9415382891
 	 	 	 
MA (Economics and Rural Development)- (Regular)	Dr. V.K. SRIVASTAVA	vksrivastava@rmlau.ac.in	9415382891
 	 	 	 
MA (History Culture and Archaeology)-(Regular)	Prof. A.P. SINGH	apsingh@rmlau.ac.in	9415048416
 	 	 	 
Bvoc (Tourism and Hospitality)-(SFS)	Prof. A.P. SINGH	apsingh@rmlau.ac.in	9415048416
 	 	 	 
MTA (Master in Tourism Administration)-(SFS)	Prof. A.P. SINGH	apsingh@rmlau.ac.in	9415048416
 	 	 	 
BVoc (Fashion Designing and Garment Technology)-(SFS)	Dr. Anup Kumar	anupkumar@rmlau.ac.in	7985150920
 	 	 	 
MA (Adult Continuing and Extension Education)- (Regular)	Dr. Anup Kumar	anupkumar@rmlau.ac.in	7985150920
 	 	 	 
PG Diploma (Fashion Designing)-(SFS)	Dr. Anup Kumar	anupkumar@rmlau.ac.in	7985150920
 	 	 	 
Applied Psychology	Dr. Anup Kumar	anupkumar@rmlau.ac.in	7985150920
 	 	 	 
BBA-(SFS),BCA-(SFS),MBA (Hospitality Management)-(SFS),MBA (Business Management and Entrepreneurship)- (Regular),MBA (Finance Control)-(SFS) ,MBA (Agribusiness)-(SFS),MBA (Tourism Management)-(SFS)	Ravindra Bharadwaj		07651954898
 	 	 	 
Sardar Patel Centre for National Integration	Dr. SHAILENDRA KUMAR VERMA	shailendraverma@rmlau.ac.in	9415183089
 	 	 	 
MA (Governance And Public Policy)	Dr. SHAILENDRA KUMAR VERMA	shailendraverma@rmlau.ac.in	9415183089
 	 	 	 
BSc (Physics Chemistry Mathematics)-(SFS),(Physics Mathematics Electronics)-(SFS),	Prof. C.K Mishra	 	9721336701
 	 	 	 
 B.Pharma Course	Dr. ANIL KUMAR	anilkumar@rmlau.ac.in	9415615292
 	 	 	 
 D.Pharma Course	Dr. SINDHU SINGH	sindhusingh@rmlau.ac.in	9415991334
 	 	 	 
Faculty of Home & Nutrition Sciences (M.A./M.Sc. Home Science P.G. Diploma in Nutrition & Diet)	Dr. Neelam Pathak	neelampathak@rmlau.ac.in	9532038720
 	 	 	 
Department of Food Technology	Dr. SHAILENDRA KUMAR	shailendrak@rmlau.ac.in	9415077035
 	 	 	 
Centre for Women Studies (Mahila Adhyan Kendra)	Dr. TUHINA VERMA	tuhinaverma@rmlau.ac.in	9415076632
 	 	 	 
Institute of Earth & Environment Sciences	Dr. JASWANT SINGH	jaswant@rmlau.ac.in	9415717168
 	 	 	 
Electronics & Communication Engineering (IET)	Dr. Ashutosh Kumar Singh	aksinghelectronics@gmail.com	8318063609
 	 	 	 
Mechanical Engineering (IET)	Dr. Dinesh Kumar Rao	dr.dineshkumarrao@gmail.com	9451938708
 	 	 	 
Civil Engineering (IET)	Dr. Ashwani Kumar Sonkar	ashwanisonkarrmlau@gmail.com	7080907063
 	 	 	 
Information Technology (IET)			
 	 	 	 
Computer Science (IET)	Dr. Lokendra Singh Umrao	lokendra.manit@gmail.com	9415772305
 	 	 	 
Electrical Engineering (IET)	Mr. Ankit Kumar Srivastava	ankitsrivastava@rmlau.ac.in	9451110115
 	 	 	 
Bvoc (Mass Communication and Journalism)-(SFS)	Dr. Vijayendu Chaturvedi	vijayenduchaturvedy@rmlau.ac.in	9415374908
 	 	 	 
Mass Communication & Journalism	Dr. Vijayendu Chaturvedi	vijayenduchaturvedy@rmlau.ac.in	9415374908
 	 	 	 
Sociology			
 	 	 	 
Master of Social Work			
 	 	 	 
Regional Language			
 	 	 	 
MSc (Physics)- (Regular)	Dr. Ganga Ram Mishra	grmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9451805326
 	 	 	 
MSc (Electronics)- (Regular)	Dr. Ganga Ram Mishra	grmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9451805326
 	 	 	 
M.Sc. Mathematics (Statistics) - (Regular)	Prof. S.S MISHRA		9208496286
 	 	 	 
MSW (Rural Development)/(Criminology)/(Human Resource)/(Personal Management)/(Medical Psychiatry)/(Family and Child Welfare)-(SFS)	Dr.Dinesh Kumar singh		9838024533
 	 	 	 
MPH -(SFS)	Dr. Dinesh Kumar Singh		9838024533
 	 	 	 
MA (Human Consciousness Yogic Science and Therapy)-(SFS)	S S MISHRA	ssmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9208496286
 	 	 	 
PG Diploma (Yoga and Alternative Therapy)-(SFS)	S S MISHRA	ssmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9208496286
 	 	 	 
BPEd-(SFS)	S S MISHRA	ssmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9208496286
 	 	 	 
BPES-(SFS)	S S MISHRA	ssmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9208496286
 	 	 	 
MPEd-(SFS)	S S MISHRA	ssmishra@rmlau.ac.in	9208496286
 	 	 	 
M.Ed. -(SFS)	Dr. RAJEEV GAUR	rajeevgaud@rmlau.ac.in	9956754873
 	 	 	 
MA (Sindhi)-(SFS)	Dr. S.K. Raizaida	 	9415715957
 	 	 	 
BLibISc-(SFS)	Dr. SIDDHARTH SHUKLA	 	9450767928
 	 	 	 
MLibISc-(SFS)	Dr. SIDDHARTH SHUKLA	 	9450767928
 	 	 	 
 LL.M	Dr. A.K. Rai	 	 
 	 	 	 
B.A	Dr. D.N Verma		9451178173
MA (English)-(SFS)	 	 	 
 	 	 	 
MA (Hindi)-(SFS)	Dr. Surendra Mishra	 	6393261433
 	 	 	 
PG Diploma (V.L.S.I. Design)-(SFS)	 	 	 


DEAN OF FACULTY



Prof. Ashutosh Sinha
Dean of Arts
Email Id.:
asinha@rmlau.ac.in
Contact No.:
9415459401



Dr. RAJEEV GAUR
Dean of Science
Email Id.:
rajeevgaud@rmlau.ac.in
Contact No.:
9956754873



Dr. H.S. SINGH
Dean of Commerce
Email Id.:
hssingh@rmlau.ac.in
Contact No.:
9450117000



Dr. Ashok Kumar Rai
Dean of Law
Email Id.:
akraisaket@gmail.com
Contact No.:
9450483729



Dr. Lajo Pandey
Dean of Education
Email Id.:
.
Contact No.:
.



.
Dean of Medical Science
Email Id.:
.
Contact No.:
.



Dean of Engineering
Email Id.:
.
Contact No.:
9721336701



Dean of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Email Id.:
.
Contact No.:
.



Dean of Paramedical
Email Id.:
.
Contact No.:
.



Dean of Home Science
Email Id.:
Contact No.:



THE REGISTRAR

Mr. Anjani Kumar Mishra
Registrar
Administrative Building
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India

THE FINANCE OFFICER
Mr. Purnendu Shukla
Finance Officer
Administrative Building
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India
The Finance Officer of the University is appointed by the state Government by a notification published in the Official Gazette and his remuneration and allowances are paid by the University. The Finance Officer is responsible for presenting the budget (annual estimates) and the statement of accounts to the Executive Council and also for drawing and disbursing funds on behalf of the University. He has the right to speak in and or otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the Executive Council but he is not entitled to vote. The Finance-Officer has the duty-

To ensure that no expenditure not authorized in the budget, is incurred by the University (otherwise than by way of investment)
To disallow any proposed expenditure which may contravene the provision of this Act or the terms of any Statues or Ordinances
To ensure that no other financial irregularity is committed and to take steps to set right any irregularities pointed out during audit
To ensure that the property and investments of the University are duly preserved and managed.

All contracts are entered into and signed by the Finance Officer on behalf of the University.

CONTROLLER OF EXAMINATON

Mr. Uma Nath
Controller of Examinaton
Administrative Building
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India
Contact No.:
Tel: 05278-245910


CHIEF PROCTOR

Prof. S.S Mishra
Chief Proctor
Chief Proctor Office
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India


DEAN OF STUDENT WELFARE
Dr. Neelam Pathak
Dean of Student Welfare
Dr.Rammanohar Lohia Avadh University
Ayodhya (UP)-224001, India

Dr. Neelam Pathak (Professor, Department of Biochemistry) is presently gracing the office of Dean Student Welfare of the University. The full-fledged office of the Dean Student Welfare of University looks after the welfare of the students within and outside the campus. Apart from various academic activities, DSW office of the University provides opportunity to the students to use their potential for the cultural and extracurricular activities.

This office organizes the following activities for the welfare of the students:

Cultural activities:
Inter collegiate Youth Festival.
Participation in debate competition for national level.
Scholarships:
Meritorious / Poor students get full / half freeship. All the facilities including scholarship provided by the U. P. Govt. are extended to students belonging to SC/ ST/ OBC / GEN classes.

S.No.	Name of Teacher	Designation & Department	Mobile No.
1	Dr. Geetika Srivastava	Associate Professor,
 Department of Physics & Electronic	9935031750
2	Dr. Abhishek Kumar Singh	Associate Professor,
 Department of Mathematics and Statistics	6393922259
3	Dr. Surendra Mishra	Associate Professor,
 Department of Adult, Continuing and Extension Education	6393231433
4	Dr. Mahendra Pal Singh	Assistant Professor,
 Department of Business Management and Entrepreneurship	9415176741
5	Dr. Dinesh Kumar Singh	Assistant Professor,
 Department of Social Work	9838024533
6	Er.Shambhavi M Shukla	Assistant Professor,
Electronics & Communication Engineering (IET)	9999763387
7	Shri Ankit Mishra	Assistant Professor,
Sardar Patel Centre For National Integration	8840303657



LOKPAL

Prof. Gopinath (Retd.)
Lokpal
DDU Gorakhpur University Gorakhpur
Contact No.:
9453111688

Prof. Neelam Pathak
Chairman
Department of Biochemistry
Contact No.:
9532038720

Prof. Siddarth Shukla
Member
Department of Enviroment Sciences
Contact No.:
9450767928

Prof. Shailendra Kumar Verma
Member
Department of Business Management and Entrepreneurship
Contact No.:
9415183089

Prof. Tuhina Verma
Member
Department of Microbiology
Contact No.:
9415076632

Dr. Sanjay Chaudhary
Member
Department of History Culture & Archaeology
Contact No.:
9415077097

Gyan Prakash Chaudhary
Student Member
Department of Adult & Continuing Education
Contact No.:
8808160420



OUR NOTABLE ALUMNI

Prof. Jai Prakash Saini
Vice-Chancellor
Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi
(B.Tech.-Electronics Engineering 1987)

Prof. J.P. Pandey
Vice-Chancellor
Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam Technical University, Lucknow
(B.Tech.-Electrical Engineering 1987)

Dr.Yatindra Mishra
Notable Writer and recipient of President Award
(B.Sc. Microbiology 1997)

Shri. Rajendra Prasad Tiwari
Joint Director
Rajya Sabha Secretariate New Delhi

Justice Devi Prasad Singh
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad
(LLB 1976)

Mrs. Justice Sunita Agarwal
Chief Justice of Gujarat High Court
(LLB 1989)

Mrs. Chandan Mishra Dwivedi
Controller of Accounts
Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs, New Delhi (MA Economics 1999)

Mr. Chandra P. Upadhyay
Dy. Director
Navisite Cloud Engineering & Infrastructure Services Boston, USA
(M.Sc. Physics(Electronics) 1988)

Dr. Rupali Gupta
Scientist, Department of Plant Pathology and Weed Research, Plant Protection Institute, Agricultural Research Organization, The VolcaniCenter, Rishon LeZion, Israel
(M.Sc. Microbiology)

Mr. Sunil Singh
End-to-End Solutions Architect Ericsson Inc. USA at Seattle, WA
(M.Sc.-Electronics 1996)

Dr. Pravin Kesarwani
Scientist for Immunotherapy Research at Beaumont Health, Department of Radiation Oncology Research Royal Oak, Michigan, United States
(M.Sc. Microbiology)

Dr.Sadiya Parveen
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine: Baltimore USA
(M.Sc. Microbiology)

Mrs. Kumud Singh
IT Software Engineer
Texas Instrument Co. Dallas, T.N., USA
(M.Sc. Electronics)

Dr. Kshipra Singh
Medicine Research Scientist
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessy State USA
(M.Sc. Biochemistry)

Mr. Mangesh Verma
Director of Operations
United Millers Limited Kenya
(M.B.A.)

Mr. Manoj Saxena
Managing Director
Bayer Zydus Pharma and Country Division Head, South Asia - Pharmaceuticals Thane (West), Maharashtra, India
(M.B.A.)

Dr.Vijai Kumar Gupta
Senior Research Scientist, Microbial Biotechnology, ERA Chair of Green Chemistry, Tallinn University of Technology (TUT), Tallinn, Estonia.
(MSc. Biotechnology 2004)

Er. Anshit Rastogi
Certified Scrum Product Owner Letterkenny, Ulster, Ireland
(B.Tech. Information Technology 2009)

Dr. Vishal Jain
Head of Major (Business), Professor,
University of Technology and Applied Sciences, Oman
(M.B.A.)

Dr.Bramha Dutta Pandey
Assistant Professor (Mathematics)
Department of Information Technology University of Technology and Applied Sciences Salalah, Sultanate of Oman
(M.Sc. Mathematics (Statistics)


FACULTY OF ARTS AND HUMANITIES
Dean Arts And Humanities



Prof. Ashutosh Sinha
Professor, Head & Dean
Email Id.:
asinha@rmlau.ac.in
Contact No.:
9415459401



DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

The Department was established by Government of Uttar Pradesh in 1984. The teaching and research activities commenced from academic session 1985-86. While the department has skilled faculty members it is also equipped with computer facility and statistical laboratory. The department undertakes research projects sponsored by UGC, ICSSR, IGFCC, Government of India, State Government etc. Seminars, symposia, workshops, 'Ambedkar, Lohia and Pt. Deendyal Upadhyaya memorial annual lecture series are organized from time to time. Eminent economists and academicians like Prof Y. K. Alagh, Prof G. K. Chaddha, Prof G. Thimaya, Prof T.S. Papola, Prof A.M. Khusro, Prof. G. Nancharaiya, Prof L. Marla, Prof S.R. Hashim, Prof. V. R. Panchmukhi, Prof, Neel Kanth Rath, Prof. B. L. Mungekar, Prof D. K. Nauriyal, Prof. A.D.N. Bajpai, Prof. T.C.A. Anant, Prof. B.K. Chaturvedi have visited and delivered lectures in the department. The department till date has organized fifteen National level Seminars & Conferences with one National Webinar (E-Seminar). Two National workshops on selfemployment in rural development sponsored by the Ministry of Rural Development Government of India and eight National level workshops of various discipline have also been organized.

The Department of Economics and Rural Development offers Post Graduation program in Economics with specialization in Rural Development. Economics governs the life of the individual, society and modern states. It integrates the study of Economics with that of organizational and institutional aspects of effective management and addresses key policy issues in Rural Development. This program is also suitable for personal working in various Governments –Non-government Departments/ Agencies, NGO'S and all sectors of economy.

The department is continuously involved in quality research and project work sponsored by UGC/ ICSSR/ Various Ministries of Union & State Department respectively. Several students from the department have qualified UGC/NET exam and faculty members have publication in reputed National & International journals.

The department has academic collaborations with Indian Association of Population Studies and Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi. The students are exposed to field work for getting and imparting training in different socially useful projects of various ministries of center and state governments. The department has an academic collaboration with Indian Economic Association (IEA), Indian Society of Labour Economics (ISLE), Association of SocioEconomic Development Studies (ASEDS), Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand Economic Association (UPUEA), Avadh Economic Association Ayodhya (AEAA), Indian Association of Population Studies and Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi.

RESEARCH CHAIRS & GOVERNMENT CONSULTANCIES:
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Chair has been established in the department by the Government of U.P. which is involved in quality research associated to economic ideas and thoughts of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and related issues of contemporary relevance. Pt. Deendyal Upadhyaya Research Chair has also been established by Government of U.P.in year 2018. In year 2019 the Department has established “Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Center for Economic Policy and Development Study (Lohia Chair)” in University Campus. Presently Prof. Vinod Kumar Srivastava, provides consultancy services as Chairman and Resettlement Expert, Bahushakhiya Visheshagya Samooh, Land Acquisition Committee, Bundelkhand Expressway, Poorvanchal Expressway, Gorakhpur Link Expressway and Ganga Expressway, Government of Uttar Pradesh.

FACULTY PROFILE:



Dr. ASHUTOSH SINHA
Professor & Head
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
asinha@rmlau.ac.in
Mobile No.:
9415459401
Full Profile of Dr. ASHUTOSH SINHA



Dr. MRIDULA MISHRA
Professor
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
mridula@rmlau.ac.in
Mobile No.:
9984908747
Full Profile of Dr. MRIDULA MISHRA



Dr. V.K. SRIVASTAVA
Professor
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
vksrivastava@rmlau.ac.in
Mobile No.:
9415382891
Full Profile of Dr. V.K. SRIVASTAVA



Dr. PRIYA KUMARI
Associate Professor
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
priya@rmlau.ac.in
Mobile No.:
9839094773
Full Profile of Dr. PRIYA KUMARI



Dr. Alka Srivastava
Guest Faculty
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
.
Mobile No.:
.
Full Profile of Dr. Alka Srivastava



Dr. Savita Devi
Guest Faculty
Area of Specialization:
.
Email Id.:
.
Mobile No.:
.
Full Profile of Dr. Savita Devi
PROGRAMMES OFFERED IN ECONOMICS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Dept. Name	Programmes	Seats	Duration	Fees	Eligibility
Economics And Rural Development	BVoc (Fine Art VISUAL ART)-(SFS)	50	01 Year 02 Years 03 Years (06 Sem.)	15,000=00	Intermediate / Higher Secondary (i.e. 10+2)
Economics And Rural Development	MA (Economics and Rural Development)- (Regular)	60	04 Semesters	5,450=00	B.A. with Economics or B.A. / B.Sc. with Mathematics/ B.Com/ B.B.A
Economics And Rural Development	PhD or DPhil (Economics and Rural Development)	 	 	 	M.A. in Economics or allied discipline
SYLLABUS
#	Programme Name	Download
1	ECONOMICS & RURAL DEVLOPMENT	
NUMBER OF STUDENT ENROLLED IN Ph.D.
#	Course Name	Registration No	Candidate's Name	Father's Name	Date Of Birth	Category
1	ECONOMICS & RURAL DEVELOPMENT	PHD001501	SUSHMITA SINGH	PADUMNATH SINGH	15/07/1994	GEN
2	ECONOMICS & RURAL DEVELOPMENT	PHD001844	AJEET YADAV	GANGARAM YADAV	10/07/1990	OBC
3	ECONOMICS & RURAL DEVELOPMENT	PHD003457	MUKESH KUMAR PANDEY	UMASHANKAR PANDEY	10/06/1980	GEN
4	ECONOMICS & RURAL DEVELOPMENT	PHD004450	AJAY KUMAR	DAYA RAM	14/06/1983	OBC



Department of Economics and Rural Development
Dr.RML Avadh University, Faizabad
Syllabus for Semester System 2011-12 Onwards
The M.A. Economics and Rural Development Course will be of two year duration divided into
04 semesters( Two Semester examination in M.A. First Year and Two Semester in M.A. Second Year).
In M.A. First Year each semester will consist of four written (compulsory papers) examination of 100
marks of Three Hours each and a compulsory seminar and viva voce examination of 50+50 marks
respectively. M.A. Second year will have two semester examinations 500 marks each out of which in
semester Third there will be four compulsory written examination 100 marks each (Three Hours duration)
and compulsory seminar and viva voce examination of 50 marks each.
Semester IV will consist of two compulsory written papers of three Hours duration, 100 marks
each, two optional papers examinations of 100 marks each of three Hours duration. In addition there will
be a compulsory written seminar work and viva —voce examination of 50 marks each.
Each paper of a semester course will be divided into five modules / Units. In each paper in total
five question are to be answered. Each question will be of equal marks. There will be two long answer
type questions from module-I to module-IV, with internal choice. The students will have to answer one
question from each module, carrying 20 marks each. Module- V will be compulsory covering eight short
answer type questions from module I to module-IV(two questions from each Module). Students will have
to answer any four questions, carrying five (05) marks each.
This will be applicable for all the four semesters.
SEMESTER- I ( I‘ Year)
Compulsory papers:-
01: History of Economic Analysis 100 marks
02: Micro ECONOMICS  100 marks
03: Principles of Rural and Agricultural Economics 100 marks
04: Statistics and Mathematics For Economics 100 marks
Seminar (Compulsory ) (A)Paper writing and presentation 50 marks
(B) Viva-voce 50 marks
SEMESTER- II ( I Year)
Compulsory papers:-
01:  Macro ECONOMICS  100 marks
02: Money and Banking  100 marks
03: Regional Economics and Area Planning  100 marks
04: Rural Development and Planning in India  100 marks
Seminar (Compulsory ) (A)Paper writing and presentation 50 marks
(B) Viva-voce < 50 marks
SEMESTER- III ( Second Year)
Compulsory papers:-
01 : Economic Development and Planning  100 marks
02: International ECONOMICS 100 marks
03: Environmental Economics  100 marks
04: Welfare EcOnOMICS  100 marks
Seminar (Compulsory ) (A)Paper writing and presentation 50 marks
(B) Viva-voce 50 marks
SEMESTER- IV ( Second Year)
Compulsory papers:-
01: Public Economics  100 marks
02: India’s Economic Policy  100 marks
Optional Papers(Group A) — Anyone of the Following papers
03 a: Labour ECOnOMICS  100 marks
03 b: wfahcmnaticl ECONOMICS 100 marks
03 c: Industrial 100 marks
03 d: Project formulation Gnd Evaluauti 100 marks
Optional Papers(Group B) — Anyone of the Following papers
04 a: Demography  100 marks
Or
04 b: Econometrics  100 marks
Or
04 c: Computer Application in Economics  100 marks
Or
04 d: Globalisation and Economy nee eee ee ee eee eee 100 marks
Seminar (Compulsory ) (A)Paper writing and presentation 50 marks
(B) Viva-voce 50 marks
Important Note:
l- Optional papers are to be selected by the candidate in consultation with the Head of the
Department . The choice from the Optional papers may be restricted , depending on the
availability of faculty members and required number of the students.
Seminar is a compulsory part of course and examination. it includes submission of seminar
file(write up on assignment topics) and presentation. Only this will enable a candidate to appear
in theory written papers. Passing in theory seminar and viva voce examination separately is
essential in accordance with the university ordinance in this context.
Computer Application in Economics will be available to only such candidates who will pay the
required prescribed fee for this paper and fulfill other conditions required for the course.
The eligibility for admission to the M.A. Course shall be graduation of three years with
Economics/Commerce/Management /Science. For Science graduation only students with
Mathematics / Statistics as one of their subjects in graduation shall be eligible for admission.

SEMESTER- I
Papers-01 : History of Economic Analysis
This paper consists of 05 modules.
Module -1: Characteristics of Mercantilism and Physiocracy. Classical thought- Adam Smith, David
Ricardo, Malthus, J.S.Mill. Karl Marx.
Module -2 : Marginal thought-Jevons, Warlas, Marshall, Pigou, Post Marginalist-Keynes.
Module -3 : Indian thought- Naoroji, Gandhi, Nehru, Ambedkar.
Module -4 : Modern thought- Friedman , Tobin, Schultz, Sen, Solow.
Module -5 : Summary and overview of above mentioned four modules.
References:
Blackhouse R.- A History of modern Economic Analysis,
Schumpeter J.A.- History of Economic Analysis
Verma NMP - Economic Thought of Ambedkar.
Blaug, M- Economic Theory in Retrospect.
Grey, A - History of Economic Doctrine
Haney- History of Economic Thought.
Roll, E- A History of Economic Thought.
Ganguli, B.N. Indian Economic Thought Vol-|
Datta B.Indian Economic Thought Voll-Il
Neff, Frank- Economic Doctrines.
Newman, P.C. — History of Economic Thought.
Gide, C and G.Rist- A History of Economic Doctrines.
Note:- In total five (05) question are to be answered. Each question will be of equal marks. There will be
two long answer type questions from module-I to module-IV, with internal choice. The students will have
to answer one question from each module, carrying 20 marks each. Module- V will be compulsory
covering eight short answer type questions from module I to module-IV(two questions from each
Module). Students will have to answer any four questions, carrying five (05) marks each.
SEMESTER- I
Papers-02 : Micro Economics
This paper consists of 05 modules.
Module-1: Methods of Economic Analysis , Elasticity of demand , supply, income and substitution:
Marginal utility: Indifference curve and Revealed Preference theory, Recent development
in demand analysis .
Module-2: Production function , Law of variable proportions, returns to scale , cost curve in short run
and long run.
Module-3: Prefect Competition, Monopoly , Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly , Average Cost
Pricing, Mark-up rule
Module-4 : Factor pricing under perfect and imperfect competition , theory of wage, rent, interest and
profit
Module -5: Summary and review of above mentioned for modules.
References:
W.J. Baumol- Economic theory and operational analysis.
R.A. Bilas- Micro Economic Theory.
G.J. Stigler- Reading in price Theory.
A. Koutsoyiannis- Modern Microeconomics
Henderson and Quandt- Micro Economic Theory
Kalyanjit Roy Chaudhary- Modern Microeconomics.
A.Sen, Micro Economics: Theory & applications.
David M Creps , ACourse on Micro economic theory
G.C Da Costa, Production, Prices and Distribution.
H Varian, Micro Economics Analysis
Ahuja, H.L. —- Advanced Economic Theory.
Chauhan, S.P.S. Microeconomics Theory, Theory and Applications
Dwivedi, D.N. Microeconomics
Note:- In total five (05) question are to be answered. Each question will be of equal marks. There will be
two long answer type questions from module-I to module-IV, with internal choice. The students will have
to answer one question from each module, carrying 20 marks each. Module- V will be compulsory
covering eight short answer type questions from module I to module-IV(two questions from each
Module). Students will have to answer any four quéstions, carrying five (05) marks each.
(4) wx
SEMESTER- I
Papers-03 : Principles of Rural and Agricultural Economics
This paper consists of 05 modules.
Module -1: Agriculture in Underdeveloped Economy, Role of Agriculture in Economic Development.
Theories — Lewis, Fei-Ranis, Jorgenson, Mellor and Schultz.
Module -2: Sizes of farms and laws of returns, Systems of farming —Peasants, Capitalist, Cooperative
and Collective.
Module -3 : Employment , Underemployment and Unemployment in Rural Areas , Sources of rural credit.
Technical changes in Traditional Agriculture.
Module -4: Agricultural Marketing, Agricultural Prices, Cobweb model , White Revolution , Rural
Industrialization Problems and Prospects
Module -5 : Summary and overview of above mentioned four modules.
References:
SAR Bilgrami - Agricultural Economics.
M.L.Dantwala, Indian Agriculture Development since Independence.
R.N.Soni — Leading Issues in Agricultural Economics.
J.W.Mellor- The Economics of Agriculture Development
T.N.Shultz, Transforming Traditional Agriculture.
Sadhu & Singh- Agriculture Economics
H.N.Southworth & BF Johnson- Agricultural Development and Economic Growth.
Note:- In total five (05) question are to be answered. Each question will be of equal marks. There will be
two long answer type questions from module-I to module-IV, with internal choice. The students will have
to answer one question from each module, carrying 20 marks each. Module- V will be compulsory
covering eight short answer type questions from module I to module-IV(two questions from each
Module). Students will have to answer any four questions, carrying five (05) marks each.
Vn
SEMESTER- I
Papers-04 : Statistics and Mathematics for Economics
This paper consists of 05 modules.
Module -1 : Correlation and Regression, Probability- Binomial, Poisson and Normal Distribution .
Module -2 : Sampling and Testing of hypothesis , t-test , chi-square test, f-test,
Module-3 : Rules of differentiation and partial differentiation, Maxima and Minima, Integration- Definite
and indefinite .
Module-4 : Determinants —Basic properties, Solution of Simultaneous equation Cramer’s Rule, Matrix ,
Types, Inversion and Transpose of matrix.
Module -5 : Summary and overview of above mentioned four modules.
References:
BC Mehta and GMK Madnani- Mathematics for Economists
D.N.Elhance and Veena Elhance- Fundamentals of Statistics .
S.P.Gupta — Statistical methods
Kanti Swroop- Operations research.
R.P.Sen — Operation Research.
Agarwal- , D.R. Elements of Statistics.
Monga, G.S. Mathematics’ for Economists
Chiang , A.C. — Fundamentals of Mathematical Economics
Mehta and Madnani- Mathematics for Economists.
Yamane, Taro- Mathematics for Economists.
Simpson and Kafka- Basic Statistics
Note:- In total five (05) question are to be answered. Each question will be of equal marks. There will be
two long answer type questions from module-I to module-IV, with internal choice. The students will have
to answer one question from each module, carrying 20 marks each. Module- V will be compulsory
covering eight short answer type questions from module I to module-IV(two questions from each
Module). Students will have to answer any four questions, carrying five (05) marks each.



